Module 1.2

Keypair
- public and private keys, pretty standard stuff
- solweb3 has helpers to create new keypairs or also recover pub from private key
- note that seems like the Keypair tool represents public key as a BN and private key as an Uint 8-bit Array of length 64, although the public key in reality is just a 32-length Uint8 array of the latter half of the PK bytes

Transactions
- they are effectively an abstraction over a solana program (SOL program == solidity function, in practical terms); it's sort of like SQL transactions in that they batch together function calls in a sequential + atomic way
--- this makes development slightly more complicated bc you have to keep track of the intermediary states if you're calling a bunch of different instructions or programs in a transaction, you have to know exactly how each one will react. so building a SOL program that does this would have a similar level of complexity as a multi-DEX MEV bot (eg. many transactions going on back and forth between different contracts/accounts)
- you have to add the Sol instructions to the transaction and then send the transaction to the cluster for it to be confirmed
--- some transactions need to be signed (eg. if they're changing balances), and an array of keypairs to act as signer is one of the arguments we use in the send transaction functions

Instructions
- Instructions in general seem to be more like "call function" objects, because an instruction by itself doesn't really do anything. you need to have an instruction processor (eg. a solana program - the programID that you specify) that actually executes the instruction.
- the accounts object you pass onto the instruction processor seems to be more flexible than the solidity model - although in solidity you always have access to the sender's address, you can't natively change this sender address or have multiple ones. but you can still pass addresses to a function as parameters if you specify that
- JK to all of the above - the accounts array is mainly used as an optimization for parallel-processing many transactions, as the array tells you which pieces of the blockchain state are going to be read or changed by the transaction (and therefore you can parallel process non-conflicting txs at the same time)
--- you have to explicitly call out what operations (r/w/sign) you'll be doing on which accounts in the vector
--- the first signer in the array is the one responsible for paying tx fees
- data in an instruction seems a bit similar to solidity (before knowing how it's actually used, anyway), as it's optional (although in SOL you can send data for any instruction while solidity I think it's only for sending a transaction)

Non-Native Instructions
- a big difference (it seems like) between SOL and solidity is that here it seems like when interacting with non-native instructions (eg. user-created programs/contracts), you have to directly read the program to understand its interface and what its expecting in the data field. I wonder if there's tools such as a from-ABI program loader that give you Intellisense directly in the IDE. although sol explorer also provides a way to verify source code, i haven't seen any examples yet. it's kinda bad for composability, although it seems there is now a way to deterministically decompile source code from deployed programs (but only under certain conditions and certainly not as simple as Ethereum -> https://github.com/solana-labs/solana/issues/12232)

System Instructions
- System instructions are a limited set of lower-level functions that achieve the building blocks of the solana programming model
--- they are not opcodes, but they are essentially part of the core solana API as they use the System Program (eg. the global Solana account/system controller) to process instructions 
- the System Program, which is sort of a core Solana API processor, is the only program that can do things like assign account ownership, allocate data, etc.
--- it's the same type (but obv a special case of) as a user-defined program 
--- the instructions contained in System Program consist of: CreateAccount, Assign (account to a program), Transfer (lamports), CreateAccountWithSeed (eg. create another account owned by same person), AdvanceNonceAccount (eg. consumes a stored nonce), Withdraw(From)NonceAccount, AuthorizeNonceAccount, Allocate (space in a potentially new account), Allocate (space) with seed, Assign (account to a program) from seed, TransferWithSeed (move lamports from an address derived from an existing seed)


Programs
- programs are just code and have no state. they rely on the data vector of the accounts they own to perform state transitions

Questions
- what is the difference between solana program and account
--- similarities to ETH: program === smart contract. They both have pubkeys just as how in ETH both (executable) contracts and accounts have addresses
--- differences from ETH: programs actually don't store any data (unlike in EVM/solidity), and there are at least 3 different types of accounts: normal accounts, program accounts, and program executable data account. so accounts can store data. this data can then used by the programs for state transitions. programs also own accounts, as opposed to ETH where accounts own contracts
- why do we include accounts in an instruction
--- optimization to enable parallel-processing more txs
- what is an instruction
--- see above (essentially a 'call function' object )
- what is the system_program, is it a sort of API with commonly used instructions?
--- yes but root-like instructions rather than just commonly used